with Bob Mathis by Julie Hopson on 18 November 1988
at the custodial apartment in the physical plant
at Texas A&M University concerning the Vietnam
War. In the interest of accumulating knowledge
about the war, I'm going to donate this tape to the
Texas A&M Oil History Collection and the
University Archives. Is that all right with you?
That's fine with me. Okay. I need your date and
place of birth. November the 21st, 1941, Sport,
Illinois. Where did you go to school? I went to
school in several different places. My father was
in the military. I graduated from high school in
Inazuki, Japan. Did you attend college? I had two
years of college in the University of Maryland.
What did you study? Business. Did you like it?
Well, I took it in sub-courses and everything when
I was in the military in Germany. University of
Maryland goes all over Europe and they have
classes
at night. Okay. Why did you join the military?
Well, I wanted to be a soldier all my life. My father
was, uh, spent 28 years in the military and he was
still on active duty when I graduated from high
school. My brother retired for 22 years as a First
Sergeant in the Marine Corps. And it's just
something that my family's done all their lives. I
like the military. How did you go about joining the
military?
Well, I walked into the recruiting depot in Rapid
City, South Dakota when I turned 18 years old and
told them that I wanted to join. And they told me
that I had to have my parents' permission, so I went
home and I got my mom and dad and we'd go back to the
recruiting depot, and they signed the papers, and
I left the next day. What year was this? 1960.
Is your brother older or younger than you? Dick's
older than I am. What year did he join? 1959. What
branch did you join? I joined the Army. Why? Well,
at the time, I wanted to get married. And I knew that
to get rapid promotion, I had to get into a
particular branch of service that had
accelerated promotions. I knew from being with my
dad that the Air Force does not have accelerated
promotions. And I knew that the Marine Corps would
keep you corporal for years. So I was working for a
guy named Casey Tips riding the fence line in South
Dakota, and we had some Nike sites that was
bordered our property. And I talked to those guys,
and they were all in the military, but they were in
missiles. And they said that the fastest thing was
to join the armored cab units and be a recon
specialist. So that's what I did. It took me 17
months to
make sergeant. When did you go to Vietnam? The
first time I went to Vietnam was in October of 1967.
What did you do in the Army between 1961 and 1967? I
was a recon specialist. I worked for the armored
cab units and guarding the Czech border and
running border patrols and things like that in
Germany. Were you a German helicopter? No. I took
my basic training at a place called Fort Ord,
California. I took my advanced training at Fort
Knox, Kentucky. And right after I got out of
advanced training, I joined the 32nd Armored
Battalion in Fort Stewart, Georgia. And right
after that, somebody in Berlin started building a
brick wall. And I gyroed to Europe with a 3rd
Battalion, 32nd Armored, and I stayed there for
three years. I was a little upset about that
because I had two days to go before I started my
30-day leave to get married. And the 1st Sergeant
tore up my leave papers, and we were all on alert. I
was going to strike one unit, and we all went to
Germany on a boat.
Did you stay in Germany the whole time before you
went to Vietnam? No. I stayed in Germany until
1964, and that was in southern Bavaria at a place
called Augsburg. which was about 60 miles north of
Munich, a real nice place. Cold a lot. And then in
1964, I came back from Germany. I went to a little
summer spot called Fort Hood, Texas, which is
really something else. We'll talk about that when
we're not on tape. And then from Fort Hood, I stayed
there nine months, and then I went to Fort Bliss. I
thought Hood was bad, but Bliss was worse. This is
when I heard about a little conflict called
Vietnam, and I volunteered to go to Vietnam in
1965. I got orders to go to Vietnam in 1966,
and I was supposed to join the 11th Infantry
Brigade in Hawaii, and we would go as a unit. Well, I
got to Hawaii in 1966. I was set to go to Vietnam. And
there was myself and 11 other guys there. And we
were the nucleus of the 11th Infantry Brigade. As a
matter of record, there was a young captain there
named Bill Carpenter, William Carpenter. He's
now a general officer. All the guys in the military
called him Maypom VI because he was put up for the
Congressional Medal of Honor. He was one of the
first guys to call Maypom on his own position.
Somebody that's listened to this tape that knows
anything about the military may recognize the
name. He was called the Lonesome Inn at West Point.
He played football. But we got some of McNamara's
100,000. Have you heard that term? We got some of
McNamara's 100,000 in Hawaii, and we trained them
in the mountains in counterinsurgency
operations, ambush techniques, and things like
that for... until October of 67 and then somebody
thought that we needed to escalate the number of
troops that were in South Vietnam so the 11th
Infantry Brigade got three ships and it took us 33
days to get to South Vietnam. Now we got there in 14
days but General Westmoreland did not know where
he wanted to end service in the country so we sailed
up and down the China Sea for about 20 days until
they figured that we needed to go into a little town
called Duck Fo, which was just north of a place
called Queen Yon, about 55 miles. It was between
Chew Line and Queen Yon. Matter of fact, a little
town called My Line is about 20 miles north
of Duck Fo. Why did it take two years almost from the
time you volunteers going to Vietnam for you to get
there? Well, I went to a unit. I had a specific unit
assignment. And the 11th Infantry Brigade was a
redesignated unit that they just brought back on
paper. It wasn't really a unit in itself because it
didn't have all the people. So they formed it on
paper. The 25th Infantry Division was out of
Hawaii and already in Vietnam. And but they might
not have been in Vietnam. They were either in the
Philippines or Thailand. That's the Tropical
Infantry Division, 25th Infantry Division. And
they were gone, so they needed a brigade in Hawaii.
And that's where we trained. That was the best
place we thought to train somebody for
counterinsurgency because of the terrain and the
rain and the mountains and the trails and stuff
like that were basically the same thing as South
Vietnam. So we got all these guys right out of basic
training. They didn't even go to their advanced
training units. They came straight out of basic
training to us. We gave them their advanced
training, but it was all geared towards ambushes
and counterinsurgency operations in South
Vietnam.
What did y'all do when you got to Duckburg? Well,
the first thing we done was set up a perimeter. It
was basically already there. There was another
unit there that had established the fire base.
There was a runway there and it was a brigade size
fire base. So when they gave us duck foe, they
initially gave us an area of operations that
required four battalions. Now, we had left one
battalion in Hawaii because it wasn't fully
staffed yet, and they hadn't received all their
training. So until that battalion joined us in
Hawaii, they made up a task force called Task Force
Barker. And what they did then is they pulled an
empty company from each of the other three empty
battalions, and they pulled a platoon from the
recon troop that I was in. Well, the platoon that I
had went to Task Force Barker. Now, this was...
Company C, which was Captain Medina's outfit that
had Lieutenant Calley in it. And then there was
Captain Black. I don't remember the other guy's
name. But Major Couch was the S3. I don't remember
the Sergeant Major's name. And, of course,
Colonel Barker was the task force commander. And
we assumed part of the area of operations, which
was just north of Quang Nang. Quang Nai was about 20
miles north of Duc Pho, and it was a major target for
the Tet Offensive because it had a major airport.
And Quang Nai was about, I guess, 20 miles south of
Chi Lai, which was the Americana Division. When we
first got there, we stayed as a separate brigade,
separate infantry brigade. And then, I guess,
about right after Tet started, They took the
193rd, the 198th, the 196th, the 11th Infantry
Brigade, and another Infantry Brigade and put
them all together and formed the Americal
Division. And the Americal Division
headquarters was in July. Did you see much action
before that? No, what they basically did at first
is they sent us out with other units that were still
in the area to learn what the area looked like. We
basically fought, uh, BC, not too many NBAs. Uh,
and we just operated patrols, did some
counterinsurgency operations, uh, and every
time we'd get off the highway, we'd just start
getting farther and farther back into the hills.
And we'd run over to the beach on the China Sea and
we'd run up and down through, uh, my life in this
one, through areas like that. It was a real,
dominated area as far as the uh bc were concerned
because they've been in there for years but it was
basically uh i guess about the first four months we
were there uh captain medina told me that he lost at
least a third of his people to nothing but booby
traps and uh he exhausted malaria and snipers so
major contacts were not uh not really a a problem
with us. It was the squad-sized ambushes and
things like that. The first year I was there, we
didn't have any major battles. Well, there was a
couple. They'd last a day or two, and we'd pull
back, or they'd leave or hide or something. Where
were you when that occurred? I was sitting on a
bridge just north of Quang Mai. that was supposed
to be, it was right on Highway 1, and it was right
outside of Arvin Fire Base. And they were supposed
to secure it, but it had been blown two or three
times, and it was a Bailey Bridge put in by American
engineers, so they put American troops on the
bridges and pulled them back out of the field and
just put them on these strong points so the VC
wouldn't blow the bridges and cut our main supply
routes. And We got a call from the task force
commander, Colonel Barker, that morning that the
Arvin advisors in Quang Nai would like an American
force to come down and just ride around the city and
show the South Vietnamese people that, hey, the
Americans are here, their equipment's here,
their men are here, and they're here to support us
in this conflict against the North Vietnamese.
And we said, sure, we're not doing anything
anyhow. We went down to Quang Mai in 10 armored cab
vehicles, and we were half-manded because we
still had to maintain security for three bridges.
So my platoon went down. This is when I had an
armored cab platoon. And we went down there, and we
were riding around, just going up and down the
streets real slow, waving to the kids, throwing
them candy. You know, it was like a big parade. And
this jeep with this American advisor comes
tearing up to the front of the column and stops my
platoon leader. His name was Lieutenant Ole. I
think he's a captain in the Indiana Highway Patrol
now. And they stopped our column there and the guy
says, hey, would you guys like to get into a
firefight? Well, we'd been in country a month and a
half and we fired at some snipers and, you know, we
had a little H&I at night and we fired some
artillery here and there just to see, you know,
keep in practice because we were all recon and we
like to keep up with those things. So, Lieutenant
Owen said, why sure, we'd be glad to help you. So we
go over to the airport, and there's a railroad
running right next to the airport, and there was a
big dike there. And we see all these South
Vietnamese soldiers laying alongside this dike,
and they're all pointing over towards the
northeast, and there was a little village, and it
was surrounded by sugar cane. And we kept, we
didn't hear any rounds going off, we didn't hear
any firing or anything like this. Well, what had
happened is the South Vietnamese were on one side,
And there was a B.C. heavy weapons company inside
the village on the other side, and nobody had fired
around yet. So they come to get this armored camp
platoon because we had .50 caliber machine guns.
We had a .50 caliber on each PC. We had two M60
machine guns on each PC. We didn't have any gun
shields yet because those were new and we hadn't
received them. So all we had up there was the
machine guns. And then... Of course, we didn't
have the other two guys in the back for the machine
guns because we had left them on the bridge. So what
we had in each PC was a driver, we had a vehicle
commander on the .50 caliber, and we had one man in
the back, which was on an M79, what we called a
Blooper. Shot a 40-millimeter shell. And so
that's all we had in these 10 tracks. And we had our
little cab tenants flying off the antennas and
stuff, you know. We were just real hot to try. Never
been shot at before. Didn't really know what we
were doing. I'd been in the Army 10 years and had
participated in a lot of live fire exercises, but
this was going to be my first time. So when we got
over to the berm and they told us exactly where they
were and then you hear this little L-19 circling
around up there saying, I see them, I see them,
they're in the village, you know, and they're just
sitting there eating. So we got... We got online,
and we went up over the berm, and we got into the
sugar cane. Well, we lost sight of each other. We
were real close when we first started out to
maintain eye contact. But after that, I got on the
radio, and I said, look for the antennas, the
little cap, and it's on the antennas to keep you
online. I said, we'll go up here about another 50
meters. We'll take a hard left, and we'll come
online into the village. Well, we came online just
to the edge of the village, And we broke out a sugar
cane field, and I saw this guy standing over next to
the wall of this last building over there. And he
had his rifle in his arms, and he was standing there
smoking a cigarette. Well, to tell you the truth, I
didn't know if he was a good guy or a bad guy. But I
shot him with my .50 caliber, picked him clean up
off the ground, and held him up there for about 10
seconds. And after that, I want you to know that
just all hell broke loose. I mean, it seemed like
the whole village exploded. fifties were going
off, people were yelling on the radio, I'm hit, I'm
hit, and we stayed in there for about 35 minutes.
Now, we were using armored piercing incendiary
rounds in our .50 caliber machine guns. We picked
it up from the Navy. And as those rounds would go
through something, they'd catch it on fire. So it
took about 30 seconds there after everybody got
off their first 50 rounds. We had the whole village
burning. And we were receiving a lot of rounds
back, a lot of automatic weapons, AKs, a couple of
heavy machine guns, because they were tearing
some holes in those PCs that were supposed to be
armored vehicles. Well, don't believe
everything you hear, okay? And it got pretty bad in
there, and after a while, we started throwing
grenades into the hedgerows and stuff, and then
the firing just stopped. So... We got a hold of the
guy in the L-19. He says, yeah, they're going out
the backside of the village, and they're running
into the sugar cane, heading for a tree line, which
was about 900 meters away. But they had cover in the
sugar cane fields all the way over there. So we
started, Lieutenant Ole started, you know, doing
some artillery adjusting and was using the guy in
the L-19 as a spotter, but we were using our guns off
the fire base that we came from, which was just
north of there. So this was actually the first day
of Tet, but, you know, nobody had told us about Tet
except it was going to be a ceasefire and nothing
was going to happen. And we couldn't figure out why
the Arvin were still laying back there on the berm.
So we pulled back to the far side of the berm and use
the Arvin as security, and we checked our weapons
and stuff again, and we're all laughing, and we got
a couple guys medevaced. One guy took a round right
through the palm of his hand. Another one had his
ear shot off, and, you know, a couple things like
that. But it had, you know, now we're all excited,
and it hadn't hit us on what, you know, you can get
killed doing this, you know. But, uh, We said,
okay, if they went out to the northeast side of the
village, then we'll just run around there. We'll
go around the village and we'll hit them again.
Well, we went around there, and we couldn't find
them. So we've got our PCs parked about 25 meters
apart. I and a guy named B.J. Babbage, which is
another vehicle commander, we get down off our PCs
and walk over to our platoon leader's track. Now,
we're out in an open field. And we're standing
there smoking a cigarette and jacking the jaw a
little bit, talking about how crummy the VC are
because they won't stand and fight and
everything. And some guy from the sugar cane field
opens up on us with a machine gun. Well, as I am
hastily moving back to my vehicle, I lost my
sunglasses. And they were prescription
sunglasses. That's the basic thing that I
remember about that day that I got upset because I
lost my sunglasses. So we started shooting up the
sugarcane fields, burning it, and everything
else. And it was starting to get dark. So we were
going to have to move out and go back up north and
secure our three bridges. So we did that because we
were just down there on loan to them. Well, the next
morning, they called us and said, Hey, we went in
with the Arvin through the village and have
determined that y'all killed 126 B.C., And we've
got the weapons and the radios, and we've got a good
body count. And we said, well, that's just great.
But we can't give you guys credit for it because the
Arvins were there, and we're trying to build up
their morale and everything. So we made it known
that the Arvin wiped out a heavy weapons company of
126 men. I said, well, ain't this something. So we
went back down there, and while we were, Moving
back down there, they had brought the whole cab
troop. Now we're talking about four platoons of
ten vehicles each. They had brought the whole cab
troop up that night to help secure the western side
of Quang Nam out by the airport. And I'm glad they
brought the whole cab troop up there and we went
back and secured our bridges. Because when we got
back up there, there were PCs smoking all over the
place. They'd been blown up. They had about 12 guys
killed. And that's when the gooks, the VC, came out
with their RPG-7s and their B-40 rockets. See,
they thought they were just going to waltz into
town because they knew that the Arbors didn't have
any armored vehicles there in that town. And they
didn't know, I guess, their intelligence was
poor, and they didn't know that an armored cab unit
had pulled into that AO. But there we were. So the
first time they got in a fight down there, they
didn't have anything to take care of their own
vehicles. But let me tell you that the RPG-7 is 20
years ahead of its time. That has got to be the best
anti-tank vehicle. It will knock out any known
tank on the battlefield today, with the exception
of now the General Abrams. It won't knock out the M1
tank. But it'll do a job on anything else it wants to
do. I get carried away, so you'll have to stop me
when you want to. After that, we figured out, hey,
this is Ted. We were hit every night on the bridges.
Got bad there for a while. After the next three
weeks, it got bad. We got rough bus, which were
regional forces to come in and take care of the
bridge security. We brought the families in with
them so we could give them security during the
night. During the day with the armored vehicles,
we could operate 10 or 15 clicks off the road and
still get back in and secure the bridges and stuff
at night. Fire missions all the time, snipers all
night long, snappers trying to infiltrate your
wire and blow you the bridges to cut your supply
line because we were, we straddled Highway 1, the
whole 11th Infantry Brigade did, basically all
the way down from the Bonson Plains to about five
flicks south of Chew Line was the 11th Infantry
Brigade area of operations. And every once in a
while, we'd go down and eat chow with the 173rd, who
was at LZ English, which they were in the box on
planes. Crazy outfit. They used to throw hand
grenades at each other in the chow line, just, you
know, to scare people. Did Arvin help you while you
were taking that village, or did they just stay?
No, they stayed back there on the backside of the
berm. And I can understand that because they had M1
carbines and they had M1 rifles and hand grenades.
They were a typical infantry unit. They didn't
have any automatic weapons with them at the time.
About a week after that, that Auburn battalion got
overrun by the 41st VC Regiment. and was
completely annihilated. They lost all their
weapons, all their uniforms and everything. So
for the next four or five weeks in our area of
operation, you didn't know who was shooting at
you. You know, it could have been the same bunch
wearing GI clothes that they got off this Arvin
battalion, and they were using American weapons.
So it got hard to tell who was who there for a while
until you got it all sorted out. But during Tet, you
didn't have to call anybody and say, hey, we're
being shot at. We need to return fire or anything
like that. You know, you knew you were in a combat
zone, and you just reacted.
What do you think of the Arvin and Greenwood? I was
afraid he was going to ask me that question. I think
the Arvins, because of the fact that they've been
fighting for over 100 years, And they had played
games with the French and the Chinese and the
Japanese, but they were just flat tired. And they
had seen so much suffering that, you
know, if you killed one of their family members,
they'd cry for a few minutes, and after that they
just got up and went home. There were some good
Arvin units. I worked with an Arvin unit, which was
the 14th Arvin Cav Squadron, It was a regiment that
was, this was the second time I was in Vietnam. And
they operated out of Pleiku. And they had a little
colonel that
just thought that the best VC was a dead VC. And he
didn't believe in the Chew Hoi program. And he
certainly didn't believe in taking prisoners.
And he had M76s, which was a real fast little tank.
that we had given him. And he just went all over the
Pleiku area and up and down the Cambodian border
killing as many people as he could. And it was a good
unit. They would stand and fight. They had a
special scarf that they wore. And you just didn't
fool around with those Colonel's units. There
were good American units and there were good Arvin
units and there were bad American units and there
were bad Arvin units. I think towards the end of the
war, I was there again in 1771. I think at first in 67
and 68, the Army was sort of like we were. I think
they really had a grip on it and were starting to be
trained good. They were getting equipment from
us. They were starting to establish a spirit of
corps and morale, and that they really thought
they could do something. Some of their range units
were just outstanding. I think in 70 and 71, when I
was back over there again, they saw the Americans
pulling out and cutting down the size of the forces
that we had over there. And I think their morale and
their spirit of war started going. They were
slipping. And instead of fighting, they'd move
out. During Tet, which was supposed to be their
holiday, same as the PC's, I believe they were
basically all on holiday. And it took them a while
to get their units back together and to get
organized and to realize that, hey, here's a major
thrust towards the South Vietnamese country. And
everybody's got to fight. And I just think that
they were tired. They had already had brothers and
sisters and parents killed. Some of them had
already been wounded two or three times, and they
just never saw an end to it. And we can go over there,
and if we were lucky, we spent 12 months there. We'd
get a million dollar wound, or we'd come home.
There's a big difference in fighting in somebody
else's country than fighting on your own. I'd hate
to see a war break out along the Mexican border or in
Texas, and us have to fight and defend the United
States and have the fighting actually take place
in our own country. Because then you've got to
worry about your loved ones, You've got to worry
about all those kind of things, you know, about
your wife and your kids. And when you're in another
country doing all this fighting, you know they're
back home going to school, eating three meals a
day, the electricity's still on, the water's
still running, they got indoor plumbing.
It's a big difference. I like the South End. These
people, on the whole, are a beautiful group of
people. I felt sorry for them. And unlike a lot of
other GIs that were in South Vietnam, I'm glad it
was there instead of here. And I'm glad it was them
instead of me. Did you try to work, or did y'all work
in any pacification programs? Pacification
programs. We moved what we knew to be hardcore VC
strongholds We'd go in and we'd burn the hootches
down, confiscate all the rice, shoot the
livestock, and we'd herd up all the people and we'd
take them out and we moved them into a
big village. Now you got these villages out in the
mountains where the water runs pure, They've been
farming the same land for 50 or 60 years. And
they've lived and born and died several
generations in the same mud hut, you know. And then
all of a sudden here these foreigners come in and
destroy everything that their generations have
lived and built. And they move them into a village
where there's 50,000 people in a city. Now we're
talking about rural country people. And you move
them into a city where there's bars and bright neon
lights and easy money and a black market and say,
now this is where you have to live and work and join
the Arvin army. And you're talking to people that
fought at Thin Ben Pew and thrown the French out,
and now they've gone back to farming, they're
relaxed, they don't want nothing to do with the
Arvids, they don't want nothing to do with the NVA,
and they certainly didn't want anything to do with
the ugly Americans.
So I think the pacification program, I better not
say that on tape, I think it was a mistake. I think
the idea that some of the Marine Corps units had is
instead of moving people out of their villages,
they'd move in five-man teams and help secure that
village so they could harvest their rice and live a
peaceful coexistence. And the five-man Marine
Corps teams kept the VC out of the villages, you
know, and protected. Now, you lost a lot of Marines
sometimes because there was good political value
for the VC to get into that kind of village. you
know, and get to the village chief and stuff like
that. But to me, that kind of program would have
done more for us than anything else. I think there
was a lot of money wasted and lost for 10 roads and
pacification programs that never got to the
villager. It stopped off someplace on the way
down. And all the stuff that was meant for that
villager never got to it. Black Market... corrupt
South Vietnamese officials, corrupt American
officials. One of the biggest trucking companies
in South Vietnam was a share owner that was Lady
Bird Johnson. Not once did they ever get ambushed
or hit because they were paying their taxes to the
D.C. that the American soldiers were fighting. If
you put an American truck out there and paint that
sucker OD and let it go down the road by itself,
it'll never get to where it's going. But them
18-wheelers, they'd get on the highway and no
trouble. Go straight into wherever they wanted to
go. Makes you think, doesn't it? First time I went
to South Vietnam, I was doing it for God and country
and Mom's apple pie. I'd been a soldier all my life,
had been brought up in it, believed in my country,
believed in my leaders and everything. If you
would have cut me, I would have bled O.D., That's
how hardcore I was about the military. About
halfway through my tour, I changed all that. And
after that, it just became survival. I got out of
the armored cab unit. I went into long-range
recon. I didn't like working with American units.
I'd take five men and go out and stay four days and
come back in three and go out four days and come back
in three. And that's how I did the rest of my tour. I
did a lot of work with Charlotte Company, 75th
Ranger Battalion, and Major Hudson was probably
one of the finest officers that I've ever met. And
that's the way he fought his war, and I liked it that
way. It was things that I'd been trained for all my
life, was counterinsurgency and ambushes, and I
liked it. And I did a good job at it. I'm here. Was
there any one event or was it a community event that
made you change your way of thinking? It was seeing
a number of things, the pacification program, it
was seeing armed soldiers and young men of
military age riding around on motorcycles,
pimping for girls, and it was seeing 18 and
19-year-old kids getting killed when they were
American kids.
Stop. Take a break.
Where did you go to do your long range cruise? Well,
I'd already done most of it. I did it in Europe. I did
it at Fort Hood. I guess I got started at Fort Hood.
They had an H-13 there and I couldn't find anybody
dumb enough to fly around with a pilot because it
was a helicopter It was getting to be new, and they
were using it for artillery fire, but now they were
going to use it for recon. So I got started there,
and we'd fly real low and slow, and I'd call back
coordinates and stuff on where I saw the enemy and
everything, and I'd just artillery fire for it.
This is when I was a buck sergeant. And when I got to
Fort Bliss, I made staff sergeant. So when I was in
Vietnam the first time, I was Staff Sergeant E6. I
was supposed to be a squad leader, but my platoon
sergeant, as soon as we got to Vietnam, went up to
Brigade Headquarters as an operational
sergeant. Instead of bringing in an E7, a new guy
that didn't know all the guys in the platoon, they
just sort of moved me over there. and let me as a
staff sergeant E6 and I took one of the buck
sergeants that I knew that did real good and put him
in as a squad leader. And that's how I got that. But I
started long range patrols in Germany.
Went through a mini ranger course for the 10th
special forces of Bantos. Took my can platoon down
there really. infusion program where you can take
a platoon down there from different units in
Europe and go through a dirty uh yeah it was dirty
but it was a 30-day course on land navigation
ambushes and recon patrols and things like that
like the special forces did and that was a lot of fun
and I just wanted to get away from I wanted to be in
Vietnam and I wanted to I wanted to be a good soldier
and I wanted to do the things that I was trained to do
I felt handicapped a lot of times. Vietnam was a
squad leader's war. It was the buck sergeant's war
and the staff sergeant's war. And by the time you
called people up to get permission to do this or
move here or can we put fire on this area or
something like that, hey, the gooks were already
gone. So you wasted a lot of time. But when you were
on long-range patrols, you were given specific
missions. and the majority of them was just recon,
find large troop movements and stuff like that,
and then call it back in, and then they'd bring out a
large American force to make contact. Sometimes
we would maintain visual contact. Sometimes
they'd say, well, we don't have anybody that's
free to operate at this time, so you need to
interdict and either ambush if it's not too large,
or call in an air strike or an artillery fire. You
know, and do as much damage as you can and then get
out of the area. So those were the kind of things
that I liked.
It was more of an individual thing. Were you still
around duck foe when you changed? Yeah, we
operated out of duck foe. Most every battalion had
a squad of guys that did their recon stuff for them.
The division had a alert platoon and they did long
range patrol. And then you had, each division had a
company of rangers that they used. And Charlie
County 75th Rangers was the one that I remember
best because of Major Hudson in 1771. But it got you
away from the regular fighting. You didn't sit up
in a foxhole all night worrying about the GI to your
right and what he was going to do. If you had the
right guys in your team, you knew exactly what they
were going to do. The platoon that I took to
Vietnam, I had 23 men wounded and I had three men
killed out of 11 months and 16 days the first time I
was in Vietnam. And I trained every one of those
guys. The three guys that got killed,
if you send a whole unit together into South
Vietnam, then that means if you leave them all
together, they all have to rotate at the same time.
So right after we got in country, we had to infuse
15% of the organization. So that meant that we had
to get rid of 15% of our people and send them to
different units. And my three
guys ended up, they went down to the 11th Cav. And
that's where they got killed, with the 11th Cav.
They didn't get killed in the 11th Cav. They had a
lot of guys wounded, you know. And that was all.
While you were there the first time, were there any
problems with spraying and drugs or alcohol? Were
there any about short time or anything like that?
No, everybody had a short time on their calendar.
That was just something that the first couple of
weeks you really didn't pay any attention to
something like that because, you know, you were
doing a tour of duty. It was just like 13 months in
going to Korea or a two-year tour of duty in Germany
because we hadn't done any fighting yet. But once
the fighting started, everybody started as
short-timers, countenance. I don't remember any
fracking in the 11th and 15th Brigades, not the
time that I was with them, 67 or 68. These are the
same officers and men that had trained together in
Hawaii on a whole. So there was a lot of respect and
admiration for each other.
When we were back at the fire base, We didn't get
much beer. Certainly wasn't any hard liquor. We
had an opportunity to drink two or three beers. I
think we were supposed to be issuing two beers per
man per day. You didn't see that out in the bush. So
when you got back to the fire base, there would be a
connex container full of about 40 cases of beer. So
in three days, you could drink about 40 cases of
beer. But in those three days, you're supposed to
get issued new fatigues, clean your weapons,
check them out, drill them again, draw new
equipment and supplies. You know, just sort of
stand down and rest when you're getting ready to go
back out again.
You can smell pot a mile away. And I can walk into a
barracks and... It can have four floors to it and I
can tell you almost what room it is on the fourth
floor of the smoking pot. Just with my nose. So, if I
can smell it, the VC can smell it. We didn't use
cologne and we didn't use a lot of other things.
Now, we smoked cigarettes and some of us chewed
tobacco. I know that's a bad habit, but that's
better than lighting up a cigarette at night. I
don't do it anymore, but I did then. I didn't see
much pot smoking. Really didn't know at the time
what it was. I do know that if you wanted to stay up
for three days in a row, that you could get a big old
red pill from the medic. And it turned out later
that I found out it was speed. I guess I was pretty
naive when it came to drugs and things like that.
Because in my military service, we just never had
that. Turned out that the first driver for my PC
that I had while I was still with the 11th Infantry
Brigade was from Haight-Ashbury.
So he knew all about those drugs, and he educated me
in what this is and what was that, and didn't do it in
my presence, because he knew that I was one of the
guys that believed that you had to be 100% all the
time, or you wasn't going to come out of it. So I
guess it was there. I didn't see any pothead
bunkers like they had in that movie Catoon. And I
didn't see a lot of guys drunk. It was just
something you didn't do because you never knew
when you were going to get hit. You could drink a
couple of beers and not get drunk. Still enjoy the
beers in the cool of the evening and smoke your
cigarette before the sun went down. Now in 1771,
You know, you have to set that whole thing up
because there was GIs that went to Vietnam that
were geared to fight, and all of a sudden, in 1771,
the war's standing down as far as the American GI is
concerned, so they don't really let him get out
there in the bush anymore. I went to the 4th Entry
Division, which I considered a national guard
outfit, and for a regular Army sergeant to say
something like that, that's terrible. But I
thought the 4th Entry Division was the rear end of
the Army, I was lucky enough, I went to the first of
the 14th Cav, which was the Cav Squadron that they
had. And so that got me a little bit closer back to
the people that I knew. But while I was in Repo
Depot, there was a sergeant there that had just
come out. He was coming back home to retire with 20
years of service. He was the first sergeant, and he
was walking down the street, just about dark. This
was right outside the Red Bull Depot because when
you come in, you go out at the same place. And this
was then on K. I put just north of what they call the
golf course area where they used to have all their
helicopters sitting there for the
first air camp. They left and we went in, the 4th
Infantry Division went in there and took over
their AO. There's a big mountain right there on the
edge of it. Anyway, this first sergeant was
walking down the street, and some black guy
stepped out high on dope and put 20 rounds in him.
Killed him right there in the middle of the street.
Well, they walked over, and the MPs come, and they
handcuffed the black guy. And they took him to Bung
Town. And you know the guy got 10 to 15 years in
labor. He wasn't responsible for his actions
because he was high on dope. They should have shot
the son of a bitch right there and saved everybody
some money I saw a 23-year-old captain, a company
commander, stepped out of his orderly room one
morning and was cutting half a machine gun, okay,
by a black soldier that was on dope. And what had
happened is they had a hooch that this young West
Point captain was going to break up. And they had
got word about it the night before, so the next
morning, When he stepped out of his armory room,
they killed him. We took a M48A1 tank down there and
stuck the gun to through the door of the hooch and
told those, I think there was anywhere from 10 to 15
guys in there, and they were all laughing and
joking. You know, did you see him fall? Did you see
him jerk around? That kind of thing. And we said,
there's a 90-millimeter HE round in this gun to.
And you people have about five seconds to come out
of there And they came out with their hands over
their heads. They took them all to Bunktown.